[music]
>> Bloomberg Audio Studios. Podcasts,
radio, news.
>> [music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Joe
Weisenthal. And I'm Tracy Alloway.
Tracy, one thing about AI is that uh
lots of lines that go up.
>> [laughter]
>> Uh yes, famously there is perhaps one
line that has captured the attention
more than others when it comes to lines
going up. Yes, but we're recording this
April 7th. Did you see the uh Anthropic
revenue chart, by the way? It's just
extreme. It's just on the number of
lines going up. I mean, there are some
some really I just Let me caveat that.
>> Up until recently, there was one chart
of a line going up exponentially that
became, I think it's fair to say, the
most viral chart in AI, right? Yes, I
would absolutely agree with that. So,
one of the many lines that go up, and
there are various lines that sort of
capture this, is um essentially just
measures of AI progress and what they
could do. What the models are capable of
and so forth, and you know, there's all
different benchmarks out there and
hobbyist benchmark creators, etc. All
kinds of benchmarks out there.
Uh organization called Meter, based out
in San Francisco, and they measure how
well AI models are doing sort of
engineering tasks, etc. And they have
these charts showing how long, you know,
certain tasks, how long it would take a
human to do them, and then whether AI
could do them, and yes, the lines just
almost vertical. I think there was
someone like one of the ones that came
out maybe very early this year or late
last year showing the latest Claude
model, and it was just like, this is
crazy.
>> When I look at these charts, they're
called time horizon charts. When I look
at them, I like intuitively I kind of
understand what they're saying, and you
can kind of see the leap in progress
between some of the previous models and
Claude, right? The latest Claude model.
And that's what got everyone excited was
you had this big exponential shift up in
the capability of that particular AI
model. But then when I start like diving
into what it actually says on Meter's
website about what these charts
represent, I start getting really
confused. I know everyone wants to get
excited about AI and charts going up in
general, but I think there's a lot of
nuance here, and we should probably talk
about it cuz the other thing going on
with Meter right now is they've become
sort of the industry standard benchmark.
And so, a lot of investment decisions
are being based on these charts, and if
you oversimplify them as just like,
okay, lines going up, and then suddenly
it goes up even more,
obviously people are going to start to
get like maybe a little overexcited.
>> Can I say one other thing, too, that I'm
very curious about? Like, I'm really
glad that there are people designing
various benchmarks for measuring AI
progress. Seems like an important thing
to get a handle on. But like, if I were
like, say, like talented or smart enough
to be like doing these things, I would
go work for one of the labs and make $10
million a year or something like that.
And so, I'm actually curious cuz a lot
of nonprofits, etc. It's like, do you
really like want to be like working at
the cutting edge of AI at a nonprofit? I
mean, I guess it Open AI is owned by a
nonprofit, weirdly enough. But you know
what I'm saying? Like, I would want the
money. Well, we should talk about it
with our guests who are currently
sitting right here. [laughter]
That's exactly right. I'm very excited
to say we have the two perfect guests to
talk about the most viral and maybe
important chart in AI right now. We're
going to be speaking with Joel Becker.
He is a member of the technical staff at
Meter, and we're also going to be
speaking with Chris Painter, the
president of Meter. So, Joel and Chris,
thank you so much for coming on Odd
Lots. Thank you so much for having us.
Yeah, thank you for having us. Yeah,
really excited to chat with both of you.
Chris, since you're the president, I'll
I'll start with you. What is Meter? How
long has it been around? What is this
organization? What's its goal? Just give
us the the sort of 60-second synopsis of
Meter.
>> Yeah, totally. I can try and you know,
sometimes I give a long version, I can
try and do a short version here. So,
Meter is a research nonprofit based in
the Bay Area, like you said, dedicated
to advancing the science of measuring
whether and when AI systems might pose
catastrophic risks to humanity as a
whole.
Focused specifically on threats that
come from AI autonomy or AI systems
themselves. So, when you talk about this
kind of this whole field in AI of
dangerous capability evaluations, people
seeing, can this AI system assist with a
chemical or biological weapon attack?
Can it advance kind of like bad actors'
ability to execute cyberattacks on a
really large scale? Meter is sort of
specialized in specifically
assessing how autonomous are AI systems,
what is the scale and like length and
difficulty of tasks that they're able to
do by themselves, partially because we
think it sets the stakes for
conversations about AI misalignment. So,
we sort of see ourselves as being on the
hook for at any given point in time
giving humanity the bits of evidence
that are most informative
for establishing the stakes of, are we
reliant on AI systems as a society in a
way that could make it really bad if
they are misaligned? I'm going to let
Joe ask the question about why you're
both working at a nonprofit instead of
one of the labs later, but one question
I do have is when I think of Meter, you
guys always come up in the context of
these time horizon charts, and I
I don't mean this as an insult or
anything, but I hardly ever hear anyone
talk about the actual like safety aspect
of your mission. Why do you think that
is? Yeah, so I think there's some
distinction between our motive for
assessing time horizons and the kind of
how it gets used then by the rest of the
world or kind of like what the origin of
the rest of the world's interest in it.
For Meter, I think the the reason that
we work on things like the time horizon
charts is because if we're trying to
establish the stakes for talking about,
could AI systems go rogue or one day
could they like try to take over and
subvert human control? Three years ago,
if you went back to around when Meter
started about four-ish years ago, and if
you it was started by Beth Barnes, Paul
Christiano, and this was kind of the
initial motive, is if you went back then
and you said, why don't I think that AI
systems are going to go rogue and like
take over or overthrow humanity today?
The kind of most intuitive, you know,
you can come up with a lot of abstract
reasons, debates about the goals AI
systems might or might not eventually
have, but the kind of most damning in
the moment reason is the AI system just
can't do much, right? It doesn't make
sense to talk about a question-answer
system that like can't even reliably
answer programming questions saying
like, is it going to hack my systems or
like backdoor me in some way? It just
doesn't make any sense to talk about
that.
>> going to write you a poem that you asked
for. [laughter] Right. Or it won't even
At the time, they couldn't do anything
by themselves. And so, if you're like
kind of being able to subvert human
control depends on agency. And so, we
wanted to come up with a measure that
kind of tracks agency over time to kind
of say, when would this argument no
longer apply? When are AI systems now
able to kind of do long complex enough
actions by themselves that the argument
kind of the goalposts almost move
somewhere else to like, well, we would
catch the AIs or the AIs don't want to
subvert human control. And so, I agree
that there is a distinction between like
how I think partially the exercise of
trying to come up with these measures
throws off things that are very like
grounded and intuitive measures of AI
progress that might be more intuitive
than just benchmarks, right? So, if you
a lot of people are in the game of
making just benchmarks where you say
like, here's my harm bench or something,
the AI gets 70%. That's much less of a
kind of grounded or long-lasting metric.
Like, it's hard to say what that means
or how that generalizes. But the idea
with time horizon is like, maybe it's
more intuitive, and I think that helps
both for safety and for like business
understanding. So, let's talk about what
this chart I you go the the main chart
here of meter.org right on the front
page, it's this time horizon chart, and
it shows Claude Opus 4.6
as of February 2026
able to complete a task length in 11
hours and 59 minutes with a 50% success
rate. I have to admit,
the first time I saw this chart or
versions of this chart, what I assumed,
and I suspect others assumed, is that it
was able to go off and work on a task
for 11 hours and 59 minutes and
then come back with an answers. But
apparently it's not that. Why don't you
walk us through like, what's what's
really being measured here? By the way,
the previous high
was all was GPT 5.3 Codex. That was 5
hours and 50 minutes. So, I guess part
of the reason this chart has blew
people's minds cuz literally that's
basically a double. But why don't you
talk to us about what's really being
measured here? Yeah, so so
fundamentally, you know, in simple
terms, we are plotting the difficulty of
tasks the AIs are able to complete over
time. And you know, the particular way
that we measure the difficulty of tasks
is in how long it takes humans to
complete those same tasks that we're
asking the AIs to do. So, in this case,
you know, we're talking about for Opus
4.6, something like tasks that take
humans 12 hours to do, we predict that
it will succeed at those tasks around
50% of the time. And yeah, you know, it
turns out that that when you plot using
this particular difficulty measure how
performant AIs are relative to how long
it takes humans to complete these tasks,
we see an exponential increase in
capabilities for AIs. And what that ends
up meaning is that you keep on having
these doublings of of capabilities
every, let's say, four months it seems
on recent trends, where you know, the
next model is not merely going to have
necessarily, you know, an hour longer
time horizon, but but perhaps be having
some multiple of the time horizon of the
of the previous model that's come out.
So, then explain how that number, that
12 hours, is established. So, there is
some engineering task, and you say,
okay, this is a task that would require
12 hours. But humans have all different
types of talent, capabilities. How do
you establish that, okay, this is was a
12-hour task this was a 6-hour task this
is whatever it is. Yeah so so the simple
answer is literally we get humans to sit
down and complete the tasks that we give
to AIs under as close to identical
conditions as possible. So first we we
come up with the tasks and that's you
know that's a whole kind of kettle of
fish we can we can talk about exactly
how we do that and then using
essentially the the same tools that
we're about to give the AIs we take
talented humans you know not people who
have seen this particular type of task
before but people who have relevant
expertise. So if it's a software
engineering task you know they they have
software engineering expertise machine
learning task they have machine learning
expertise and then we time them. We see
we see how long it takes for them to
complete those tasks successfully and
then roughly we call the difficulty of
the task as measured in human times
complete as the average time it took
these humans to complete the task. Then
we'll run the AIs on this same set of
tasks typically today for the very
easiest tasks that they're more or less
always going to succeed. There's some
mid-range of tasks where you know
perhaps they succeed 50% of the time or
perhaps for some tasks in that range
they succeed 0% of the time and for
others 100% of the time and so they're
getting 50% on average let's say and
then for the much harder tasks perhaps
they're getting closer to 0% and then
[snorts]
the point at which we predict you know
in the middle of all of these 0% and
100% by task the point at which we
predict that they'd have a 50% chance of
succeeding that is either a 50% chance
of succeeding on some task or 50% of the
tasks of that difficulty that we think
they would succeed on that's what we're
going to call the time horizon of these
models. I think one thing also that
could be good to explain here is the
task distribution. I mean this is not
this is not all activities that humans
do we are specifically here interested
in or the like there's some question in
what tasks are you know like Joe
mentioned we're having people come into
our office do the task to get a sense of
how long it takes. We're not having them
come in and like you know paint
paintings or write novels or you know
we're we're focused here specifically on
things that are in the distribution of
work that a
um engineer at a like we like to think
of it as like a frontier AI lab the
tasks that they might be doing. So this
is things like software engineering it's
fine-tuning AI models it is like
software machine learning that kind of
task. Wait can I just ask why did you
decide to focus on engineering because
you could have widened it out to you
know if we're talking about AI being
capable of you know taking over the
world there are all sorts of substantive
tasks that would fall under that
category so why just do engineering?
Yeah I think that for one thing maybe
other people on the team are maybe Joe
has thoughts about this but I think my
particular motive in being interested in
the time horizon on software tasks is
that first of all it's the thing that
the industry is very like already even
before we started working on this is
very focused on so it's one of the
capabilities that you should expect to
come along for the ride earliest it's
the thing that like a lot of
optimization pressure is being exerted
on and then I think that it is kind of
the like thing that you would expect as
an early warning kind of sign of this AI
R&D automation. So to some extent Meter
thinks of itself as trying to build you
know science that or advanced science
that can say when are we getting to the
point that AI systems could improve
themselves or speed up the pace of AI
development when will AI research kind
of feed on itself and the kind of core
capability for that might be software
engineering and machine learning
research ability. There are other skills
that could be relevant to taking over
the world um I think other people have
done time horizons on like cyber
security since yeah. But I suppose it is
true like the basilisk isn't going to
paint its way into like power or
something like that. Okay the other
might deceive you you might be very
convincing or cunning in some way and
hand over the keys.
I might say a few a few mental models
you know we don't have perfect evidence
of this whatsoever but my rough sense
sort of colloquially or you know my
prior before evidence comes in is that
if we did study tasks on these very
different distributions you know not
machine learning not software
engineering I'm not sure about painting
exactly but you know perhaps other kinds
of task distributions that we could
enumerate that basically we would see
this similarly shaped exponential
progress over time where every I'm not
sure exactly but let's say you know 4
months 6 months something like that the
level of capabilities as measured in
time horizon would be doubling at
something like that pace maybe from a
much lower level. So you know one
example that we do have better evidence
of is that the AIs today are much less
performant at you know anything that
requires vision capabilities seeing
what's on a screen clicking around at a
at a computer but they're getting you
know tremendously better at that at that
sort of thing over time. I just do
mention quickly we did actually do a
very kind of brief investigation of this
on other task distributions that's on
our website somewhere like cross-domain
time horizons I think we looked at data
from the Teslas shared on self-driving
I'm forgetting the other there's like OS
world maybe some of these are like
somewhat similar still kind of in the
distribution of software tasks but
trying to get further afield into things
like vision.
>> [music]
[music]
>> How big is the sample size on the humans
who are actually doing work? And also
is it getting harder getting like human
engineers into the room to compete with
like Claude Opus 4.6 versus say if I was
a mediocre engineer and I'm not I'm a
non-existent engineer but if I was a
mediocre one I would like maybe I would
feel good about going up against like
GPT-3 or something and maybe I would
feel a lot worse about myself going up
against like Claude. Yeah you know on
these tasks I'm in I'm in a pretty
similar position myself to you.
So we have approximately three although
it varies quite a lot across tasks human
baselines per task so you know typically
we're averaging over something like
three. I think the the final numbers
it's my impression that they're not
going to be so sensitive to the
particular baselines that we choose.
Aren't the longer tasks weak more weakly
baselined? Yeah so so indeed I think it
will get a lot harder to baseline these
tasks as the length of tasks the AIs are
able to successfully complete gets
longer and longer. You know you might
think at some point the length of task
that they can complete is longer than
the doubling time. You know in in 4
months time they're going to be able to
complete tasks of more than 4 months and
then it's you know kind of becomes
perhaps close to impossible to get these
4 months long baselines. Of course we're
not at that point yet but you know
definitely it has become more difficult
to get these baselines as as time has
gone on. At the moment not impossible
but but very challenging. Joe these are
the future jobs for displaced engineers
right? It's competing against the codes
for benchmark purposes.
>> benchmark of the year We found the jobs.
So we mentioned at the beginning the
most viral chart in AI is this chart
that you have on the front of your
website your website defaults to this
and it shows you know this doubling. So
if if we actually like go back to
November let's say November 2025
Gemini 3 Pro 3 hours and 44 minutes
Claude Opus 4.6 12 hours. That's at the
50% success benchmark. If we go to the
80% benchmark which the website doesn't
default to
the improve the pace of improvement
looks a little less impressive to me. So
okay now it's like
it does not have the same gap pretty
clearly. Now 80% is still not 100% and I
know that this is your Meter's goal is
about like you know human safety and all
this stuff but when we think about
people look at this and they use it as a
stand-in for how performant are these
models even 80%
you know certainly for like any business
application. I understand you're not
like serving business here per se but
probably businesses care about this.
Even 80% may not be very good enough and
it does not look as crazy when you look
at the 80% chart as it does at the 50%
chart. Why the focus on the 50% chart
and given like why not look at the chart
that just does not look as impressive?
Yeah maybe two central things to say.
One to my eyes the 80% chart basically
does look as impressive or the
doubling time is about the same. This is
cope on my part. It [laughter] was it's
the same it's the same increase but at a
an offset of It's it's the same pace of
progress you know it's something like
five times smaller than the than the 50%
than the 50% number but you know that
only takes you two doublings and if each
doubling takes around 4 months that
means that in in 8 months time you're
going to have the same 80% success rate
roughly as as you do 50% success rate
today. That's one thing to say. Maybe a
second thing to say is you know remember
at the beginning I said essentially what
we're doing is plotting the difficulty
of tasks that these AIs can complete
over time just with this particular
measure that ends up showing this clean
exponential trend and we've picked a
particular number as our difficulty
number and you know that that is this
50% reliability threshold. We could have
picked a different one. I think there
are reasons for picking the 50% one in
particular it's the one that's
statistically we're we're better able to
to measure for some for some technical
reasons it's the one that shows up in
previous literature that there there are
some couple of a couple of other reasons
why why we can go for 50% rather than
80%. Maybe a final thing to say is that
this 50% number is sort of equivocating
between these tasks it's able to
complete 50% of the time
and 50% of the tasks it's able to
complete 100% of the time and 50% it's
able to complete 0% of the time.
And actually I think the situation is
it's somewhere in between but it's a
little bit closer to the latter where
there are some tasks that it's
completing with near perfect reliability
and some tasks in that range that it's
completing with very low reliability.
And for downstream economic applications
or for applications inside of these
major AI companies or something you know
you might think that that's more
favorable in some sense that there are
some of these tasks where we're getting
100% reliability even even for very
challenging tasks. I think two other
things may maybe it could be useful to
just explain when you you said that
there are technical reasons why it's
easiest to measure at 50%. One like it
is just the case that it is 50% is the
point at which it is like least
sensitive to like the distribution is
kind of thickest right? I mean correct
me if this is wrong, but my I mean,
there are like to resolve something like
95% you would need way more samples
because then you need to have some that
are like you need way more samples to be
able to resolve that level of precision.
I think that there are some caveats to
that picture, but but let's say even
more extreme. You know, let's say that
we cared about, you know, 99%. In that
case, if we had 1% label noise, quotes
and quotes, if you know, if sometimes we
were accidentally grading some of the
failing tasks passing, some of the
passing tasks as as failing, then we
just never be able to estimate that
reliably, right? Okay. Um and at a 50%
this comes a little bit closer to
washing out. And then I think one other
intuitive thing here, one intuition is
that if you give me a task and you give
me the model, it is the point at which I
think that the model, if all you tell me
is the time horizon, the length of task
that it takes a human to do the task,
the 50% time horizon is the point at
which I think it is more likely that the
model will be able to do the task than
that it can't. And I just find that
intuitive, yeah. How much interest you
got on these charts from potential
investors specifically? And the reason I
ask is because I was just messing around
and like Googling some stuff and when
the Opus chart, the latest Opus chart
came up, someone posted it on Reddit and
I think like the second comment on it
was someone going, "How do I invest in
Open AI?" And like and like people were
they were trying to club together to
like invest in these companies. So
clearly there are people out there who
are using these charts as investment
tools. I would say you know, we don't
get an enormous amount of inbound from
investment firms. I mean, sometimes, you
know, VCs or whatever, we're based in
the Bay Area will reach out to us. I
think that there's some kind of
principle of our goal is to inform the
public and give them the best evidence
that we can about when we might get to
this point of kind of, you know, AI
being, you know, fully autonomous or
able to improve itself. And there's some
principle
at play here of like I kind of want to
enable people to do whatever
they will do with that information. And
I think that we don't engage a ton in
kind of the like business side or
investment implication of the work. One
kind of thought experiment I sometimes
say to myself is, if I do believe that
at some point we're going to get this AI
that's improving itself and we're like
AI research is automated and you have
all these fears about a singularity,
would I rather that like all of Wall
Street like falsely didn't think that
was coming when I believed it was coming
or would I want them all to know that it
was coming given that I believe it's
coming? And I think all of humanity,
maybe this is more of a personal view,
but I think if this is possible that we
will automate AI research, I think all
of humanity being aware of it, aware of
where we're heading is sort of a
precondition for us all being able to
figure out what to do about it. And so I
don't kind of want like certain people
or one side or one team to kind of like
selectively be in the dark because they
might invest on the basis of this or or
something like that. But we don't, you
know, it's not where we put our time.
We're we're focused on informing the
public. The public includes some
investors. So on that note, like what is
the actual level at which we're all
presumably supposed to panic or at which
like if you're a policy maker you would
start to get worried about AI being able
to automate and improve on itself in a
way that eventually becomes detrimental
to humanity? I don't know exactly what
the level is on this time horizon
measure. I think, you know, one thing to
say is we have made real progress on the
science of measuring these AI systems
and how capable they are, but I think
there's a long way to go and and in
important sense I think we're behind on
this task. We're measuring some
underlying technical trend and some
point I do think that's that implies
greater greater risks of astonishing
things happening, although Chris can
speak more to other arguments that we
might back out to for why even if AI is
very capable we still might not see
catastrophic dangers emerge in the short
term.
Yeah, I'm unsure. You know, I think part
of the reason why the AGI chatter has
really picked up particularly in the
wake of like everyone using Claude Code
is it's very easy to imagine like you're
sitting there it's like, yeah, do this,
do this. It's like, I don't even need to
be here, right? I think you sort of get
a very intuitive feel for like how the
human could come out of the loop. What
happens today, as I'm sure this has been
tried, like if you go to like Chat GPT
and you say, here's a here you have
Claude Code access, go build something.
And the AI is, what actually happens
today when AI is working with AI? Yeah,
my my sense is that at some point, you
know, at a further away point than would
have been true some some time ago, the
AIs will more or less fall on their
faces. That's that, you know, there are
some things they're not so capable of
today.
>> Like collaborative hallucinations will
they just like, you know, just like
devolve into terrible Yeah, I think all
sorts of ways this this can go. You
know, at some point they're going to
need to rely on external resources and
and and today they're they're not as
capable at managing these external
resources effectively. I think they're
less capable at sort of ideation and
sort of self-awareness about where they
are in the problem today than they are
at these kind of raw software
engineering skills. You know, you know,
as as you mentioned, the ways in which
AIs are autonomous today or close to
autonomous today is the human has the
idea and then, you know, submits that
idea to a Claude Code or a Codex or or
one of these other agentic AI tools and
then they handle the the software
engineering component. And possibly
there's still still some some
intervention after that. I do imagine
that the sort of circle of autonomy or
something gets larger over time. I do
think there's no fundamental barrier, it
seems to me, to AIs having those ideas
and and to be moved to a greater level
of abstraction. But if we were purely
relying today on on these fully
autonomous capabilities, you know, could
you manage research department, any any
department of your choice inside of a
major AI company, you know, my my guess
is probably not. Mhm.
Actually, on this note, this reminds me
something I wanted to ask. So when you
look at the domain-specific
time horizon charts, so the ones that
show like, I think you call them task
suites or something like that. Like I
guess productivity by specific job and
you see these different lines. So
sometimes you see like almost horizontal
lines and sometimes you see squiggly or
steeper lines.
What is actually happening there? Like
how are we supposed to interpret that?
Like is this a measurement problem or is
it saying something very fundamental
about like what AI can and can't do
under current conditions? The thing that
I think would be good for Joel to
explain is that I think that that there
is a distinction here between will AI,
like the time horizon chart doesn't by
itself, I think, tell you will
productivity in one specific kind of job
increase because of access to AI. Yeah,
maybe one thing to say on that chart
showing the time horizon on on on these
different task distributions relative to
my guesses ahead of time, you know, I
think those time horizons are remarkably
similar. I think the doubling times, the
pace of progress in AI seems more
similar than I would have guessed to the
original trends that we that we
published, although, you know,
imperfectly so.
On this difficulty translating what we
might call raw AI capabilities in some
sense, you know, capabilities on
benchmarks or something to to real-world
productivity, I think there are a number
of differences and a number of ways in
particular in which the benchmark
results are overestimating what we might
see in the wild. You know, not not
hugely overestimating. I I think we do
see that people are getting real utility
out of these modern agentic AI tools,
but overestimating to some extent.
One is that the scoring implicitly is
different. In real problems I'm scoring
based on something a bit more holistic
than these algorithmic scoring
procedures, these automatic scoring
procedures that we're using at Meta and
many other people are using in the in
the benchmark world. There's some notion
of code quality if you're if you're
working in software engineering, but but
for other tasks there's there's um
Beautiful code, elegant code, people
always talk about. Yeah, yeah, yeah. For
for other tasks there's going to be If
Anna Wintour was coding, this is what it
would look like. [laughter]
One more thing is that the tasks that
come up in the wild are more likely to
be messy in some sense. They involve
working with other people. They they
involve working in much larger code
bases or or sort of more open-ended
problems, maybe with something even
adversarial going on. In the uh in the
software engineering context that might
be that someone's trying to make a
change to the part of the code base that
you're currently working on and and you
need to and you need to work around
that. And we do tend to see that the AIs
are less capable of working on these
more messy problems. I I don't want to
overstate that. You know, it's not it's
not an enormous effect, but you know,
that's that's one thing that gets in the
way of these productivity increases. You
know, and then I do think there's
there's something to the reliability
question, right? Where, you know, if it
was true that for a certain type of task
you only had, you know, 80% reliability,
then every time you're going to need to
go back and verify the work of of these
AIs. And not only verify the work of
these AIs, but without the context of
how they implemented the solution
relative to if you went about the task
yourself, you'd already have that in in
your head. And so this verification
step, quotes and quotes, would take less
time. You know, I I don't expect these
frictions to be sort of so fundamental
in some sense or or I imagine they they
go up levels of abstraction. I think not
only is the underlying technical
progress real, but I think the the
productivity improvements are also going
to show up increasingly, but yeah, there
are all these frictions. Tracy alluded
to this question when she asked about
VCs and investor interest. So people see
these charts and regardless of what
Meta's point is, like, this is
incredible, I got to invest in this. But
this brings me to this broader thing
that I find very strange about AI, which
is this kind of odd sort of Baptist and
bootlegger relationship between the AI
labs, people who are building this
stuff, and the sort of alignment safety
people. And they sort of go back and
forth and like the you have the heads of
the lab saying, yes, this might destroy
the world and take all your jobs. And
the safety people and the alignment
people says, yes, this might destroy the
world and like I'm
very strange industry, right? Like the
only thing that I can think of is
cigarettes where like they warn you that
smoking is bad, except they had to do
that because they lost a lawsuit. I
don't think they were particularly
inclined to do that. I can't think of
any other industry where the most
enthusiastic people about it are also
warning and dooming about how bad the
thing they're building could be. So, I'm
sort of curious like
you know, first of all, like and I
talked about this in the intro, like who
is the type of person that's like
working at Meter? That is like skilled
enough to do like advanced evaluations
and like where's the funding coming
from? But like talk to us about like
who's behind Meter and why they're
there. Yeah, totally. So, I think one
thing to say on the history of kind of
people caring about AI safety in the Bay
Area is that this concern goes back like
quite a a ways. I'd say for over a
decade. There are many people who got
into the field because they saw this
trend of deep learning, like what if
deep learning works and it kind of goes
all the way to artificial general
intelligence and then super
intelligence. And if that works, then it
could affect everything. I think
possibly when people worry about this,
there's a future that they have in mind
with super intelligence that's even more
capable than what people who think of
themselves as like AGI pill today think
of. They're imagining AI systems that
can run, you know, the entire economy.
And I think people who kind of a while
ago, or many years ago, saw that vision
and were sort of alarmed about the
stakes of it. Many people have this
intuition that the thing to do is go and
work in the industry because if you're
like helping build it, you know, what's
the best way to shape the future? It's
to build it. And I think that there's
obviously you could have questions about
how sincere that is for for many of the
people who are in the industry or if
there's kind of a mix of different
motivations and like, you know,
different wolves inside of them where
maybe they partially are motivated by
that, but also they're like there's kind
of this like Oppenheimer like
it feels good to feel like you're in the
position of making something that's
dangerous maybe.
>> Someone once described OpenAI to me,
this was years ago, a friend said it was
like OpenAI was sort of like the
Manhattan Project except the goal was to
not build the bomb at the very end if
that makes any sense. So, to your
Oppenheimer point, it's like very
strange.
>> And I think one thing to emphasize is,
you know, while while it could be that
there's a mix of motivations now,
there're definitely many people, I think
in the Bay Area, who sincerely believe
that the the technology is headed to
some place that will be very difficult
for a human where it will be very
difficult for humanity to stay kind of
in the driver's seat or like stay in
control in kind of a meaningful sense.
It does seem as though like people talk
about oh, the big AI labs have like a PR
problem or something like that. They
keep bringing this up and it's like
maybe they just believe it. So, I think
that this concern is quite old and I
think many people have this intuition
that they're like I can influence the
thing by building it. But now there's
this problem that that logic kind of
always recommends that you continue
building more advanced technology or
like more advanced AI systems. And now
you have this problem where there's all
of these companies and they all say that
they need to build it because if they
don't build it, another company will.
And then even if all of the and they
could all have doubts about each other's
commitment to safety principles.
Famously, the leaders of the labs really
do not get along. They're not friends.
It's not easy for them to kind of sort
out the safety thing among themselves.
And then even if all of the US AI labs
kind of agreed to do that, they then
have this kind of external bogeyman of
China, right? What will the Chinese
companies do? And so there's this sense
in which just like even if the concern
is real, I think a a lot of people then
have who are in the industry have the
the instinct that they kind of there's
no guiding principle for what they
should do on safety other than to like
build leverage for themselves for later.
And I think that is a concerning state
of affairs AI development to be in
globally. You know, obviously we're
trying to do something different by like
informing the public or kind of giving
like, you know, you could imagine that
the situation would be better if or like
one gap that exists right now in that
picture is that it's the people building
the technology who most believe that
it's going to be destabilizing and sort
of all encompassing. Maybe if the public
and governments all were on the same
page and believed the same thing, if it
were true that it was headed there, then
there would be kind of like more time
for society to figure out a response
from people who are not trying to build
leverage over the technology themselves
directly or or, you know, control the
technology via some kind of like public
action or government. Can I just ask
very quickly since you brought up China
and I don't want to forget to ask this
question, but Kwenn doesn't show up on
your like main charts. I think you did a
preliminary assessment of it a while
ago, but like what's the difference
between assessing one of the closed
models in America versus one of the open
source models over in China? I think one
thing to say is that the capabilities
are are lagging behind. We think that
they're they're lagging behind. I'm not
sure that So, they're still relevant,
they just like don't make it onto the
chart or Um so, we we do try to
prioritize just because Meter has has
limited resources, staff time in
particular. The the models that we that
we anticipate being on the frontier and
in general, the Chinese models have been
something like, you know, 9 to 12
months, let's say, behind the US models.
And I think the gap by time horizon is
is probably even larger than the gap by
benchmark scores where there's some I'm
not sure how scientific I can make this,
but there's some colloquial sense or
something like that. The Chinese models
are stronger according to benchmark
scores than they would be on, you know,
truly held out problems in in some
sense. Problems problems like on the on
the Meter task.
>> the benchmark? Is that what that means
or I I'm not sure technically, you know,
exactly how that shakes out, but but
something spiritually spiritually close
to that. I'm not sure that's true for
for all Chinese models. I'm sure it's
true for for lots of models outside of
China. But that I I think that's at
least one possibility.
>> [music]
[music]
>> I'm very curious, when you talk to
external actors in all of this, and I'm
going to group them into, I guess,
policy makers, investors, and the labs
themselves, like who are you interacting
the most with at the moment? I think
that in practice, we end up interacting
a lot with AI labs because there's some
amount of sorting out, getting access to
models, working with them to set new
precedents on things related to
third-party red teaming and third-party
risk assessment. We think of our
audience as being sort of like
high-context members of the public. So,
they're kind of like people, you know,
who are maybe like you too, right?
People who are kind of like People
listening to this podcast.
>> people listening to this podcast. People
with kind of who have to make important
decisions that will be informed by the
the pace of AI progress or like the the
kind of profile of AI capabilities
overall. Because we're based in the Bay
Area, I think we like disproportionately
end up interacting with people who are
building the technology and like closer
to it. Partially, I think back to Joe's
point before, I think this is kind of
because it is the case that to kind of
care about a lot of these frontier
problems, you're kind of selecting for
people who are building the technology
themselves. There's some sense in which
like the companies in the industry
spends more time thinking today about
frontier capabilities assessment than
the government does.
>> Yeah. I think like one day you could
imagine us getting to the point where
the government is like very focused on
this and dedicating a lot of resources
to it. And at that point, I would expect
Meter to be spending more time talking
to governments Yeah, that's kind of what
I was getting at cuz our sense is in a
lot of the conversations, like we talk
to people and they'll say something
about like, oh, it's important to have a
social safety net for an AI-enabled
future.
But no one seems to be really thinking
about it in a lot of detail. And when
you say, you know, it's easy to imagine
or maybe the government will care more
about this, not so easy for me to
imagine. I seems like they mostly care
about, you know, our data centers and
like where they're located and stuff
like that. It would be nice if we had
policy makers really looking at like
frontier capabilities and stuff. Still
seems kind of a way off. But it is
interesting, you know, you're like
talking about like the sort of like
capitalist dynamic, right? There's
competition and it's it's like you have
a lot of people that are really worried
about oh, what if the other guys get to
ASI or AGI first or what if the Chinese,
etc. How much does the fact of like free
market capitalism and the demand, you
know, the big investors at the VC funds,
like they want to return. They want an
IPO. We might get some big AI IPOs this
year, in fact. How much do you find that
to be perhaps in tension with the safety
element? Yeah, I
maybe yeah, people on our team would
have different views on this. I
personally don't feel
that there's yeah, there's some
thing here of like investors are key
decision makers and, you know, they're
people too. That sounds strange to say
investors are people too. I sound like
Mitt Romney or something. But I I think
that like I think that the element of
this that feels like it could be in
tension is if you build a bunch of
financial obligations to keep kind of
the pedal to the metal no matter what
the risks are going into the future. So,
like one thing I think a lot about is if
you're like building up a huge amount of
debt to build data centers. And then say
that you do find evidence that you're
now worried about about the, you know,
loss of control from AI systems, you do
find instances of AI systems going
rogue. Do you now have like a financial
commitment to build out those data
centers and like continue kind of the
pace of progress? I think that is one
place where I feel the tension pretty
acutely. Like you're building these
expectations into the market that could
kind of force you to continue
development when you otherwise would
rather invest more in safety or yeah,
like it at least gives you a kind of
financial obligation to
continue scaling at least compute. I
think that like the people themselves
being informed about the progress does
not seem bad to me. I think it's like
good in some ways for everyone to be on
the same page about capabilities that
could be related to subverting human
control later on. But I think in the
world beyond like the information that
Meter shares, I do think there is a
tension. Like the fact that private
companies are building this, I think
could cause really acute tensions in the
future where, yeah, people make these
commitments that they wouldn't if they
were trying to like slow or you know
maximize social resilience of the
technology. Yeah, I'm not sure how these
things shake out, but I but I think
there are some forces on the other side,
right? Like, you know, some safety
promoting technologies, quote unquote,
or techniques do make the models more
useful, you know, if they're if they're
better complying better complying with
your will in some sense. And so, you
have capitalist incentives, standard
capitalist incentives to to invest in in
in that kind of research. Maybe that
doesn't cover, you know, the broad suite
of of safety research that that seems
important. So, it it certainly doesn't
rule out capabilities progress as as
being an important axis on on which on
which you do want to scale, but you
know, I think I think there are some
some forces in each direction. Since you
mentioned compute just then, can you
talk a little bit more about I guess the
relationship between like the time
horizon improvements and the cost of
compute at the moment and like what
you've actually seen and how that
impacts it? Yeah, so so one
extraordinary fact from from my
perspective, I'm not sure how to how to
fit these facts together, but something
like the R&D spends on compute of these
companies has risen exponentially, of
course, and in fact it's risen
exponentially at essentially the same
rate as time horizon progress. You know,
I think there's nothing necessary about
that, you know, it doesn't mean by
itself that if compute progress slows
then capabilities progress will also
slow, but you know, it's clearly an
important input into into AI progress. I
expect that to to continue to be true in
future. Sometimes people ask us if we
think it's plausible or how plausible we
think it is that that capabilities
progress, this exponential capabilities
progress, might slow down at some point
at some point in the future. And you
know, one reason it seems it's hard for
me to consider it plausible that it will
slow down in the next at least small
number of years is that a lot of those
compute R&D investments basically
already baked in, right? Like the the
data centers have already been built,
you know, plans for data centers even
beyond 2027, 2028
presumably, you know, coming coming to
fruition, coming coming about. And so,
some of these input investments are
already baked in in some sense. So, it
would be surprising to see capabilities
slow to the extent that compute has been
an important input. After that maybe
maybe you need to think about, you know,
other arguments for how capabilities
might slow, but that's roughly how I
think about it.
There's a very good or interesting
critical substack post called against
the meter graph by someone named Nathan
Whitkin who brings up one an interesting
point that I wouldn't have thought of
had I not read it, which is
you're paying the software engineers to
come in and perform these tasks, right?
It seems like you know, maybe this will
be the last job of humans is just
sitting doing benchmarks.
If I were like a good software engineer
and you say, Joe, come in and do this
task, how do you prevent me? Oh man,
this is taking me a long time.
Meanwhile, I keep getting $100 an hour
for like looking at my computer and ooh,
this is tough. I'm going to have to come
back tomorrow and keep working on this.
How do you avoid the sort of conflict of
interest where the person who's paid to
work on this problem may be encouraged
to take as long as possible to solve it.
And with only three people working on it
at times, I [sighs and gasps] don't
know. This like this does not It seems
like a conflict of interest to me. Yeah,
so the short answer is, you know, in
general we are incentivizing these
people to to complete the task as soon
as possible. Um in particular to
complete the task faster than their
peers who are attempting the same task
the time that it will take for them to
complete the task.
>> a bonus if they do it faster than Yeah,
yeah, approximately there's a there's a
bonus if they complete it faster faster
than anyone else. You know, another
thing to say is I think it just is true
that our baselining methodology or or
the ways in which we compare to humans
in some ways leaves a lot to be desired.
That's you know, ideally we would have
invested, you know, 100 times as many
resources in having 100 baselines human
baselines per task and those would have
come from, you know, perhaps the very
best software engineers or machine
learning engineers in the world. Maybe
that would be the maybe that would be
the comparison that we're making. And
indeed, we'd be doing all of all of this
procedure over many more tasks, not just
many more tasks, many more tasks over
wider task distributions than just
software engineering or machine learning
engineering. I mean, I I do think time
horizon still represents progress over
over what's come before in in the
science of measuring AI capabilities,
but you know, in some ways I'm
sympathetic to a lot to a lot of
criticisms of time horizon. I do think
that some of the details, at least for
the work we've done so far, you know,
aren't going to matter as much as you
might naively think. So, choosing the,
you know, shortest baseline time that we
end up observing or the longest time,
you know, it's actually not going to
make that much difference to the final
measurements. You know, of course, we do
think these people are talented software
engineers or cybersecurity people or or
so on depending on the task, but you
know, perhaps we could have found even
more talented people. They would have
completed it in half the time and so,
you know, naively it would seem like the
time horizon that we estimate of these
models would be half as long as we
actually end up observing, but of course
that that wouldn't change the doubling
time. It would mean you'd get to the
same level after another another four
months. In some sense, the big picture
that I want time horizon to point to is
less this like opus 4.6 is 12 hours in
particular and more that we're seeing
this remarkable pace of progress that
shows no signs of of slowing in in the
recent past and and I think in in the
near future as well. You know, in fact,
it shows some signs of speeding up.
Well, I was going to ask about this
because I think recently the statistic
that you would always hear was like a
doubling every 7 months, something like
that. How fast do you see it going in
the near future? Yeah, so I was a
doubling over every 7 months person.
There was there was controversy in our
team about about what to believe here
because when we originally published
this work approximately a year ago,
you'd see, you know, if you plotted a a
single straight line, a single
exponential, you'd get something like,
you know, six or seven months, let's
say, but if you restricted to just the
time since I think GPT-4O, since the
2024 models onwards, you'd see something
closer to this sort sort of like four or
five months trends. And some people
believed in that and you know, some
people like me have the intuition that
well, we have so few data points. We
should we should really be estimating
over this larger number of data points
and the larger number of data points
says every six or seven months. There
are a couple of things that have changed
my mind and and
made me realize my colleagues were right
since since then. One is that for the
models that have that have come out
since, you know, what's what trends has
has better predicted how performant
those models would be and it's very
clear that the answer to that is the the
four month doubling time and not this
seven month doubling time. You know,
there's some some possibility that could
speed up again. We we've seen it we've
seen it speed up once. I think there are
some reasons in principle why you why
you might expect it to speed up again. I
think there are some caveats about this,
you know, these are these are maybe some
some takes that my my colleagues would
agree with and so, you know, maybe maybe
you should discard that or you you know,
you should think that they're going to
convince me in the way that they did
with the with the four month versus
seven month doubling times. I have some
suspicion that the tasks that Meta is
measuring performance on are, you know,
in some sense, more and more narrow
slice of possible tasks and in
particular a more and more narrow slice
that is perhaps similar to the kinds of
tasks that you'd expect these major AI
companies to be training on in the first
instance. And so, in some sense, we're
increasingly, more so than was the case
before, measuring progress on the exact
types of tasks that they're trying to
get better at. You know, you you might
think for instance the kinds of tasks
that would make for good reinforcement
learning environments, the kinds of
tasks that you can score quickly and
cheaply and and and automatically. I
think that progress is real. I think
that progress generalizes to some extent
to other types of tasks. I think I think
we're seeing, you know, remarkable
progress in these more messy tasks for
example. I've one last question, which
is like how big's your team, funding,
and like also how many people at Meta
are basically like really rich from AI
and they're like, you know what, I'm
good. I don't need to pursue like stick
around for the IPO or whatever. I'm set
and now I want to work on something and
let humanity know. I've seen like there
are other independent AI researchers and
they talk about this. It's like I want
to be able to talk about what I saw and
said Miles Brundage, someone who has
like a little think tank, he's talked
about this. What's like how many people
are like rich already and they're like,
okay, now I want to work for something
that's public facing. Yeah, so Meta
right now is about 30 people, although
we're growing and hoping to grow fast.
We are hiring, I should say,
meta.org/careers.
And yeah, you were touching before and
kind of the thing about is it difficult
to be a nonprofit. You know, we can't
pay people in equity. Um we
Right, yeah, there's no no IPO or
anything for Meta, but we do try to pay
competitively on cash compensation,
right? That's an area where we feel we
can like somewhat compete with labs and
it's true that I think a a lot of our
team is just motivated by trying to kind
of do something different, like not, you
know, all the companies to some extent
are in this business of kind of like
building somewhat redundant products,
kind of competing for the same role in
the world and Meta is in a really unique
position at the moment where I think
that we have like access and the ability
to communicate these ideas and explain
the state of AI research to a number
like a a lot of audiences that might be
hard for like individual researchers
inside of a company. Like we get to talk
to a lot of governments directly. We get
to come here and talk with you all and
that's kind of different. I think if you
look at all the actors that are working
on the frontier of AI research or AI
safety, you kind of if you compare us to
AI lab staff, I think that our work gets
to be we get to kind of every day work
on whatever research we think will be
most informative to the like public
decision making about AI.
>> not ex-AI, but ex as in former AI lab
staff who were maybe there was a tender
at some point and now they work at Meta?
>> Yeah, we do have some of those. Yeah.
So, we do have some people who
previously worked at AI labs. I do think
that as time goes on, I think one hope
that I have is that more, you know,
there there will be more and more
researchers who have kind of like made
the money that they need from working in
the industry and now are excited in kind
of like lifting all boats by working on
kind of like inside of an organization
where the north star can be what is most
informative to the rest of the world
outside of these like relatively small
set of companies. Chris is very polite.
I think that's I think that's wonderful.
I'm tempted to be a little bit a little
bit more aggressive. In this
conversation, I think we have spoken
through Meter's work on some of the most
important problems in the world.
Problems that are going to define the
future, I think, for not just the next
years, but you know, coming coming
decades, maybe maybe even coming
centuries. And we've also spoken about
some of the ways in which Meter work is
is not might not what you might want it
to be. That there's a long way to go in
the science of evaluating these AIs. Why
have we not made more progress? You
know, maybe maybe a couple of reasons. I
think clearly the central reason is that
we are bottlenecked on on technical
talent, on incredibly capable people to
to to come work on these questions. I
was on a Meter work retreat recently
where we were brainstorming, you know,
20, 30 of these what seemed like world
important problems. Problems that we
think no one else is going to get to if
we do not get to them. And we are able
to conduct research on on how many of
those problems? I think it's one, two,
you know, maybe if we do an
extraordinary job this quarter, it might
be three. As Chris alludes to, I think
if you're if you're interested in, you
know, less working on redundant products
at these major AI companies and more
advancing our understanding on some of
the most important questions in the
world that are that are going to shake
the world for years to come, Meter's
Meter's a great place to go. Well, yeah,
one more thing to say about that is like
the vibe inside of Meter is a state of
triage, right? And I think people often
tell themselves externally people might
guess, oh, you know, Meter's a it's
outside of any of the AI labs so the
thing it might most struggle with is
things like access to AI models, you
know, you can't do the research you want
cuz you don't have you're not building
the thing yourself. In practice or
that's the story that people always tell
is you have to build, you know, the
future to shape it. In practice, I think
our experience at Meter is that like
when we want to try new types of
research that would require new kinds of
structured access,
at this point has been that AI labs are
like pretty game to play ball on that.
Um and the thing that what is more
happening is that we're having to turn
down opportunities to do stuff like that
because we don't have the staff that we
need to make those things happen.
[music]
Interesting. John, Chris, thank you so
much for coming on Odd Lots. Absolutely
fascinating conversation and I
appreciate you taking your time. Great
to have you in studio. Yeah, thank you
so much. Thank you so much for having
us.
>> [music]
[music]
>> That was a really interesting
conversation. And it to that we were
starting from the end sort of the idea
of like, okay, here are some really
important questions. Like let's just set
everything aside.
>> And there's 30 people working on them.
And there's, you know, and like how many
people want to do it? And it's like,
okay, we try to match cash, comp, etc.
Like that seems like kind of a tricky
issue. If like if you accept the premise
that these are some big questions we
have to get right and we got to land
this plane hopefully. Like that's a bit
of an issue. Yeah. Um the other thing I
thought was really interesting was the
Chinese models not really making it on
the charts even though like we know in
the market itself like when Deep Seek
when that new version came out, that was
like this huge thing where everyone
started to panic and then to not see it
even like land on the time horizon chart
is kind of interesting.
>> I guess it's I mean I guess I buy the
reasoning from their perspective that
the only interesting question from
Meter's perspective is like the most
cutting edge which may be slightly
adjacent to the most interesting chart
for like business, right? So it's like,
okay, we know that Deep Seek and Quan
and Kimmy and all those are like very
impressive. Do they push like the very
frontier? Perhaps not. But just in
general, I find this space so weird
because it's like here you have these
people who are like clearly quite
alarmed at the potential here. And most
people I think look at these charts and
they say like, wow, this is like I want
to invest in this or this is like really
exciting.
>> know. Like that's why my first question
was like you're here for AI safety
purposes, but everyone seems to get
excited about the line go up chart,
right? Like there's a disconnect.
>> Like I say when an industry basically
says it's worried by itself, Yeah.
>> pay attention.
>> It's really strange. And this gets back
to, you know, a very it's very strange
where you have the CEOs of these
companies who are in many cases the most
alarmist. And there's this sort of
cynical thing and I don't totally
discount the cynical interpretation is
like oh, they're saying this cuz they
want to get investors and so forth and
they need all this money. But look, it
was also true that OpenAI and Anthropic,
but OpenAI a little more, were like
founded with these very exotic corporate
structures like a private company owned
by nonprofit, etc. Which they presumably
did because they took pretty seriously
the fact that this technology and
science was like very strange and not
just like
it's not just enterprise software.
>> Right. Like they were self-limiting in a
way. One other interesting thing too
that uh this idea is like, okay, like
first of all, what's the difference
between 7 months and 4 months time
doubling? Not much. You know, it's like
these people are like, oh, I think
>> it's exponential, isn't it? I guess it's
exponential, but it's still funny to me.
It's like, oh, I think like AI is going
to destroy all white collar work in 2
years. And someone else is like, no, no,
I think it's going to be 3 years. As if
that makes like any different
whatsoever. But one thing to consider
Joel sort of alluded to this. You know,
you had like OpenAI shutting down its
like video efforts, etc. So perhaps part
of the story is just this intense focus
now on the software engineering side as
what these labs are working on and sort
of like all these other side quests are
not as important. So maybe we will see
even more rapid progress on some of
these technical benchmarks because
clearly from the labs' perspective,
that's where the action is more than
some of these consumer things like
making making images or videos. Yep. All
right, shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there. Okay, this has
been another episode of the Odd Lots
podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway. You can
follow me at TracyAlloway. And I'm Joe
Wiesenthal. You can follow me at The
Stalwart. Follow our guest Chris
Painter. He's at ChrisPainterYep. And
Joe Becker, he's at Joe_BKR.
Follow our producers Carmen Rodriguez at
CarmenArmand, Dash Bennett at DashBot,
Kell Brooks at KellBrooks, and Kevin
Lozano at KevinLloydLozano.
And for more Odd Lots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odd lots for the daily
newsletter and all of our episodes. And
you can chat about all these topics 24/7
in our Discord,
>> [music]
>> discord.gg/odd
lots. And if you enjoy Odd Lots, if you
like these AI episodes, then please
leave us a positive review on your
favorite podcast platform. [music] And
remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely ad free. All you
need to do is find [music] the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcasts and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
>> [music]
[music]